CHUNK: 62
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0062
TITLE: 4 Small wavelets, still short
PAGE_START: 10
PAGE_END: 11
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 10, 'page_end': 11, 'section_title': '4 Small wavelets, still short', 'word_count': 912, 'block_count': 2, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 2, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8767, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 95.37, 'ocr_pages': '10,11'}

4 Small wavelets, still short
but more pronounced; crests
have a glassy appearance
and do not break.
8Leaves and small twigs
in constant motion;
wind extends light flag.
Large wavelets; crests begin to
break. Foam of glassy appearance.
(Perhaps scattered whitecaps.)
Ideal water flying
characteristics in
protected water.
Light
Breeze
Gentle
Breeze
Moderate
Breeze
Dust and loose paper
raised; small branches
are moved.
Small waves, becoming longer;
fairly frequent whitecaps.
13-18
Fresh 19 - 24
Breeze
Strong 25-31 Large branches in motion;
Breeze whistling heard in telegraph
wires; umbrellas used
with difficulty.
-3
-7
12
Small trees begin to
sway; crested wavelets
form in inland water.
Moderate waves; taking a more
pronounced long form; many
whitecaps are formed.
(Chance of some spray.)
This is considered rough
water for seaplanes and
small amphibians,
especially in open water.
Large waves begin to form;
white foam crests are more
extensive everywhere.
(Probably some spray.)
inconvenience felt in
walking against the wind.
Moderate 32-38 Whole trees in motion;
Gale
Sea heaps up and white foam
from breaking waves begins
to be blown in streaks along
the direction of the wind.
This type of water condition
is for emergency only in small
aircraft in inland waters and
for the expert pilot.
Figure 3-1. The size of waves is determined by the speed of the wind.
to describe the combined motion of all the factors
disturbing the surface.) These waves tend to be a
chaotic mix of heights, periods, and wavelengths.
Because the wind causes the height to increase faster
than the wavelength, they often have relatively
steep, pointed crests and rounded troughs. With a
windspeed of 12 knots, the waves begin to break at
their crests and create foam.
The height of waves depends on three factors: windspeed, length of time the wind blows over the water,
and the distance over which the wind acts on the water.
As waves move away from the area where they were
generated (called a fetch), they begin to sort themselves by height and period, becoming regular and
evenly spaced. These waves often continue for thousands of miles from where they were generated. Swell
is the term describing waves that persist outside the
fetch or in the absence of the force that generated them.
Aswell may be large or small, and does not indicate the
direction of the wind. The wake of a boat or ship is also
a swell.
Unlike wind and current, waves are not deflected much
by the rotation of the Earth, but move in the direction
3-2
in which the generating wind blows. When this wind
ceases, water friction and spreading reduce the wave
height, but the reduction takes place so slowly that a
swell persists until the waves encounter an obstruction,
such as a shore. Swell systems from many different
directions, even from different parts of the world, may
cross each other and interact. Often two or more swell
systems are visible on the surface, with a sea wave system developing due to the current wind.
In lakes and sheltered waters, it is often easy to tell
wind direction by simply looking at the water’s surface. There is usually a strip of calm water along the
upwind shore of a lake. Waves are perpendicular to the
wind direction. Windspeeds above approximately eight
knots leave wind streaks on the water, which are parallel to the wind.
Land masses sculpt and channel the air as it moves over
them, changing the wind direction and speed. Wind
direction may change dramatically from one part of a
lake or bay to another, and may even blow in opposite
directions within a surprisingly short distance. Always
pay attention to the various wind indicators in the area,
especially when setting up for takeoff or landing.
pe

3-3
can subject the floats to hard pounding as they strike
consecutive wave crests. Operating on the surface in
rough conditions exposes the seaplane to forces that
can potentially cause damage or, in some cases,
overturn the seaplane. When a swell is not aligned
with the wind, the pilot must weigh the dangers
posed by the swell against limited crosswind
capability, as well as pilot experience.
On the other hand, calm, glassy water presents a different
set of challenges. Since the wind is calm, taxiing and
docking are somewhat easier, but takeoffs and landings
require special techniques. Takeoff distances may be
longer because the wings get no extra lifting help from
the wind. The floats seem to adhere more tenaciously to
the glassy water surface. When landing, the flat,
featureless surface makes it far more difficult to
gauge altitude accurately, and reflections can create
confusing optical illusions. The specific techniques
for glassy water operations are covered in Chapter
4, Seaplane Operations–Preflight and Takeoffs, and
Chapter 6, Seaplane Operations–Landing.
Tides are cause for concern when the airplane is
beached or moored in shallow water. A rising tide can
lift a beached seaplane and allow it to float out to sea if
the airplane is not properly secured. Depending on the
height of the tide and the topography of the beach, an
outgoing tide could leave a beached seaplane stranded
far from the water. [Figure 3-2]
While waves are simply an up and down undulation of
the water surface, currents are horizontal movements
of the water itself, such as the flow of water downstream in a river. Currents also exist in the oceans,
where solar heating, the Earth’s rotation, and tidal
forces cause the ocean water to circulate.
