CHUNK: 17
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0017
TITLE: SEAPLANE CHARACTERISTICS
PAGE_START: 5
PAGE_END: 6
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 5, 'page_end': 6, 'section_title': 'SEAPLANE CHARACTERISTICS', 'word_count': 850, 'block_count': 2, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 2, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8855, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 95.23, 'ocr_pages': '5,6'}

SEAPLANE CHARACTERISTICS
There are two main types of seaplane: flying boats (often
called hull seaplanes) and floatplanes. The bottom of a
flying boat’s fuselage is its main landing gear. This is
usually supplemented with smaller floats near the
wingtips, called wing or tip floats. Some flying boats
have sponsons, which are short, winglike projections
from the sides of the hull near the waterline. Their purpose is to stabilize the hull from rolling motion when
the flying boat is on the water, and they may also provide some aerodynamic lift in flight. Tip floats are
sometimes known as sponsons. The hull of a flying
boat holds the crew, passengers, and cargo; it has many
features in common with the hull of a ship or boat. On
the other hand, floatplanes typically are conventional
landplanes that have been fitted with separate floats
(sometimes called pontoons) in place of their
wheels. The fuselage of a floatplane is supported
well above the water’s surface.
Some flying boats and floatplanes are equipped with
retractable wheels for landing on dry land. These aircraft
are called amphibians. On amphibious flying boats, the
main wheels generally retract into the sides of the hull
above the waterline. The main wheels for amphibious
floats retract upward into the floats themselves, just
behind the step. Additional training is suggested for anyone transitioning from straight floats to amphibious
aircraft. [Figure 2-1]
There are considerable differences between handling
a floatplane and a flying boat on the water, but similar principles govern the procedures and techniques
for both. This book primarily deals with floatplane
Figure 2-1. Flying boats, floatplanes, and amphibians.

2-2
operations, but with few exceptions, the explanations
given here also apply to flying boats.
A number of amphibious hull seaplanes have their
engines mounted above the fuselage. These seaplanes
have unique handling characteristics both on the water
and in the air. Because the thrust line is well above the
center of drag, these airplanes tend to nose down when
power is applied and nose up as power is reduced. This
response is the opposite of what pilots have come to
expect in most other airplanes, and can lead to unexpected pitch changes and dangerous situations if the pilot
is not thoroughly familiar with these characteristics.
Pilots transitioning to a seaplane with this configuration
should have additional training.
Many of the terms that describe seaplane hulls and
floats come directly from the nomenclature of boats
and ships. Some of these terms may already be
familiar, but they have specific meanings when
applied to seaplanes. Figures 2-2 and 2-3 describe
basic terms, and the glossary at the end of this book
defines additional terms.
Other nautical terms are commonly used when operating seaplanes, such as port and starboard for left and
right, windward and leeward for the upwind and downwind sides of objects, and bow and stern for the front
and rear ends of objects.
Research and experience have improved float and hull
designs over the years. Construction and materials have
changed, always favoring strength and light weight.
Floats and hulls are carefully designed to optimize
hydrodynamic and aerodynamic performance.
Floats usually have bottoms, sides, and tops. A strong
keel runs the length of the float along the center of the
bottom. Besides supporting the seaplane on land, the
keel serves the same purpose as the keel of a boat when
the seaplane is in the water. It guides the float in a
straight line through the water and resists sideways
motion. A short, strong extension of the keel directly
behind the step is called the skeg. The chine is the seam
where the sides of the float are joined to the bottom.
The chine helps guide water out and away from the
float, reducing spray and helping with hydrodynamic
lift. Hydrodynamic forces are those that result from
motion in fluids.
On the front portion of the float, midway between the
keel and chine, are the two sister keelsons. These longitudinal members add strength to the structure and
function as additional keels. The top of the float forms
a deck that provides access for entering and leaving the
cabin. Bilge pump openings, hand hole covers, and
cleats for mooring the seaplane are typically located
along the deck. The front of each float has a rubber
bumper to cushion minor impacts with docks, etc.
Many floats also have spray rails along the inboard
forward portions of the chines. Since water spray is surprisingly destructive to propellers, especially at high
r.p.m., these metal flanges are designed to reduce the
amount of spray hitting the propeller.
Floats are rated according to the amount of weight they
can support, which is based on the weight of the actual
volume of fresh water they displace. Fresh water is the
standard because sea water is about 3 percent denser
than fresh water and can therefore support more
weight. If a particular float design displaces 2,500
pounds of fresh water when the float is pushed under
the surface, the float can nominally support 2,500
Step
Chine
Keel
Wingtip Float
Bow
Spray Rail
Forebody Length Afterbody Length
Stern
Figure 2-2. Hull components.
