CHUNK: 40
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0040
TITLE: SEAPLANE BASE OPERATIONS
PAGE_START: 12
PAGE_END: 12
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 12, 'page_end': 12, 'section_title': 'SEAPLANE BASE OPERATIONS', 'word_count': 366, 'block_count': 1, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 1, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8962, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 95.31, 'ocr_pages': '12'}

SEAPLANE BASE OPERATIONS
In the United States, rules governing where seaplanes
may take off and land are generally left to state and
local governments.
Some states and cities are very liberal in the laws
regarding the operation of seaplanes on their lakes
and waterways, while other states and cities may
impose stringent restrictions. The Seaplane Pilots
Association publishes the useful Water Landing
Directory with information on seaplane facilities,
landing areas, waterway use regulations, and local
restrictions throughout the United States. Before
operating a seaplane on public waters, contact the
Parks and Wildlife Department of the state, the State
Aeronautics Department, or other authorities to
determine the local requirements. In any case, seaplane pilots should always avoid creating a nuisance
in any area, particularly in congested marine areas or
near swimming or boating facilities.
Established seaplane bases are shown on aeronautical
charts and are listed in the Airport/Facility Directory.
The facilities at seaplane bases vary greatly, but most
include a hard surface ramp for launching, servicing
facilities, and an area for mooring or hangaring seaplanes. Many marinas designed for boats also provide
seaplane facilities.
Seaplanes often operate in areas with extensive recreational or commercial water traffic. The movements of
faster craft, such as speedboats and jet-skis are unpredictable. People towing skiers may be focusing their
attention behind the boat and fail to notice a landing
seaplane. Swimmers may be nearly invisible, often
with just their heads showing among the waves. There
is no equivalent of the airport traffic pattern to govern
boat traffic, and although right-of-way rules exist on
the water, many watercraft operators are unaware of
the limits of seaplane maneuverability and may
assume that seaplanes will always be able to maneuver
to avoid them. Many times, the seaplane itself is an
object of curiosity, drawing water traffic in the form of
interested onlookers.
When seaplane operations are conducted in bush
country, regular or emergency facilities are often limited or nonexistent. The terrain and waterways are
frequently hazardous, and any servicing becomes the
individual pilot’s responsibility. Prior to operating in
an unfamiliar area away from established seaplane
facilities, obtain the advice of FAA Accident
Prevention Counselors or experienced seaplane
pilots who are familiar with the area.
