CHUNK: 20
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0020
TITLE: Untitled section
PAGE_START: 3
PAGE_END: 4
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 3, 'page_end': 4, 'section_title': 'Untitled section', 'word_count': 747, 'block_count': 2, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 1, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8705, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 47.66, 'ocr_pages': '4'}

1-3
The buoyage system used in the United States employs
a simple arrangement of colors, shapes, numbers, and
lights. Whenever operating near buoys, keep in mind
that the length of chain holding the buoy in place is
likely to be several times the depth of the water, so the
buoy may be some distance from its charted location,
as well as from any danger or obstruction it is intended
to mark. Do not come any closer to a buoy than
necessary.
Buoys with a cylindrical shape are called can buoys,
while those with a conical shape are known as nun
buoys. The shape often has significance in interpreting
the meaning of the buoy. [Figure 1-3]
Since a buoy’s primary purpose is to guide ships
through preferred channels to and from the open sea,
the colors, shapes, lights, and placement become
meaningful in that context. Approaching from seaward, the left (port) side of the channel is marked
with black or green can buoys. These buoys use odd
numbers whose values increase as the vessel moves
toward the coast. They also mark obstructions that
should be kept to the vessel’s left when proceeding
from seaward.
The right side of the channel, or obstructions that
should be kept to the vessel’s right when headed
toward shore, are marked with red nun buoys. These
shown on nautical charts prepared by the Office of
Coast Survey (OCS), an office within the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
Light lists prepared by the Coast Guard describe lightships, lighthouses, buoys, and daybeacons maintained
on all navigable waters of the United States.
Seaplane Base
No Facilities or Complete
Information is Not Available
Civil Seaplane Base
with Fuel and Services
Military Seaplane Base
with Fuel and Services
Figure 1-2. Seaplane landing areas have distinctive symbols
to distinguish them from land airports.
Keep to Right of Buoy or Piling
when Coming from Seaward
Keep to Left of Buoy or Piling
when Coming from Seaward
Keep to Right
to Follow
Primary Channel
Coming from
Seaward
Keep to Left
to Follow
Primary Channel
Coming from
Seaward
Mid-Channel Markers
Figure 1-3. Buoys typically used along waterways.
Ch 01.qxd 8/24/04 10:28 AM Page 1-3

1-4
buoys use even numbers whose values increase from
seaward. The mnemonic “red, right, returning” helps
mariners and seaplane pilots remember to keep the red
buoys to their right when proceeding toward the shore
(“returning” to their home port).
Black and white vertically striped buoys mark the center of the channel or fairway (the nautical term for the
navigable part of a river, bay, or harbor), and may use
letters starting at A from seaward.
Naturally, not all waterways lead straight from ocean to
port, so there are also buoys to mark the junctions of
waterways. Buoys with red and black horizontal bands
mark junctions or places where the waterway forks.
They also mark wrecks and obstructions that can be
passed on either side. The color of the top band (red or
black) and the shape of the buoy (nun or can) indicate
the side on which the buoy should be passed by a vessel proceeding inbound along the primary channel. If
the topmost band is black, the buoy should be kept to
the left of an inbound vessel. If the topmost band is red,
keep the buoy to the right when inbound. Buoys with
the black top band will usually be cans, while those
with the red top band will usually be nuns.
For waterways that run more or less parallel to the
coast, there is no obvious inbound or outbound to give
direction to the waterway, so by convention the
inbound direction of such waterways is assumed to be
“clockwise” around the contiguous states. This means
that for waterways running parallel to the east coast,
southbound is considered the inbound direction; for
waterways along the Gulf coast, inbound means
westbound; and for waterways along the west coast,
northbound is inbound.
Daybeacons and daymarks serve similar purposes as
buoys and use similar symbology. In the United States,
green is replacing black as the preferred color for portside daymarks. [Figure 1-4]
These are just the most basic features of the most common buoyage system in the United States. There are
other buoyage systems in use, both in the United States
and in other countries. Sometimes the markings are
exactly the opposite of those just described. Good
pilots will obtain a thorough understanding of the maritime aids to navigation used in the areas where they
intend to fly.
