CHUNK: 25
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0025
TITLE: Untitled section
PAGE_START: 9
PAGE_END: 9
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 9, 'page_end': 9, 'section_title': 'Untitled section', 'word_count': 282, 'block_count': 2, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 1, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8915, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 95.62, 'ocr_pages': '9'}

3-1

CHARACTERISTICS OF WATER
A competent seaplane pilot is knowledgeable in the
characteristics of water and how they affect the seaplane. As a fluid, water seeks its own level, and forms
a flat, glassy surface if undisturbed. Winds, currents,
or objects traveling along its surface create waves and
movements that change the surface characteristics.
Just as airplanes encounter resistance in the form of
drag as they move through the air, seaplane hulls and
floats respond to drag forces as they move through
water. Drag varies proportionately to the square of
speed. In other words, doubling the seaplane’s speed
across the water results in four times the drag force.
Forces created when operating an airplane on water
are more complex than those created on land. For
landplanes, friction acts at specific points where the
tires meet the ground. Water forces act along the
entire length of a seaplane’s floats or hull. These
forces vary constantly depending on the pitch attitude, the changing motion of the float or hull, and
action of the waves. Because floats are mounted
rigidly to the structure of the fuselage, they provide
no shock absorbing function, unlike the landing gear
of landplanes. While water may seem soft and yielding,
damaging forces and shocks can be transmitted
directly through the floats and struts to the basic
structure of the airplane.
Under calm wind conditions, the smooth water surface
presents a uniform appearance from above, somewhat
like a mirror. This situation eliminates visual references for the pilot and can be extremely deceptive. If
waves are decaying and setting up certain patterns,
or if clouds are reflected from the water surface, the
resulting distortions can be confusing even for
experienced seaplane pilots.
