CHUNK: 22
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0022
TITLE: Untitled section
PAGE_START: 4
PAGE_END: 4
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 4, 'page_end': 4, 'section_title': 'Untitled section', 'word_count': 578, 'block_count': 2, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 1, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8721, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 95.31, 'ocr_pages': '4'}

1-4
buoys use even numbers whose values increase from
seaward. The mnemonic “red, right, returning” helps
mariners and seaplane pilots remember to keep the red
buoys to their right when proceeding toward the shore
(“returning” to their home port).
Black and white vertically striped buoys mark the center of the channel or fairway (the nautical term for the
navigable part of a river, bay, or harbor), and may use
letters starting at A from seaward.
Naturally, not all waterways lead straight from ocean to
port, so there are also buoys to mark the junctions of
waterways. Buoys with red and black horizontal bands
mark junctions or places where the waterway forks.
They also mark wrecks and obstructions that can be
passed on either side. The color of the top band (red or
black) and the shape of the buoy (nun or can) indicate
the side on which the buoy should be passed by a vessel proceeding inbound along the primary channel. If
the topmost band is black, the buoy should be kept to
the left of an inbound vessel. If the topmost band is red,
keep the buoy to the right when inbound. Buoys with
the black top band will usually be cans, while those
with the red top band will usually be nuns.
For waterways that run more or less parallel to the
coast, there is no obvious inbound or outbound to give
direction to the waterway, so by convention the
inbound direction of such waterways is assumed to be
“clockwise” around the contiguous states. This means
that for waterways running parallel to the east coast,
southbound is considered the inbound direction; for
waterways along the Gulf coast, inbound means
westbound; and for waterways along the west coast,
northbound is inbound.
Daybeacons and daymarks serve similar purposes as
buoys and use similar symbology. In the United States,
green is replacing black as the preferred color for portside daymarks. [Figure 1-4]
These are just the most basic features of the most common buoyage system in the United States. There are
other buoyage systems in use, both in the United States
and in other countries. Sometimes the markings are
exactly the opposite of those just described. Good
pilots will obtain a thorough understanding of the maritime aids to navigation used in the areas where they
intend to fly.

NIGHTTIME BUOY IDENTIFICATION
Usually only the more important buoys are lighted.
Some unlighted buoys may have red, white, or green
reflectors having the same significance as lights of the
same colors. Black or green buoys have green or white
lights; red buoys have red or white lights. Likewise,
buoys with a red band at the top carry red lights, while
those with a black band topmost carry green lights.
White lights are used without any color significance.
Lights on red or black buoys are always flashing or
occulting. (When the light period is shorter than the
dark period, the light is flashing. When the light is
interrupted by short dark periods, the light is occulting.)
A light flashing a Morse Code letter “A” (dot-dash)
indicates a mid-channel buoy.
There is much more to the system of maritime navigation aids than can be presented here. Nautical books
and online resources can be a great help in extending
knowledge and understanding of these important aids.
Daymark Daymark
Pointer Pointer
Port (Left) Markers
(When Coming
from Seaward)
Starboard (Right) Markers
(When Coming
from Seaward)
Figure 1-4.Typical daymarks.
Ch 01.qxd 8/24/04 10:28 AM Page 1-4
