CHUNK: 63
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0063
TITLE: Untitled section
PAGE_START: 11
PAGE_END: 11
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 11, 'page_end': 11, 'section_title': 'Untitled section', 'word_count': 286, 'block_count': 1, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 1, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8746, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 95.41, 'ocr_pages': '11'}

3-3
can subject the floats to hard pounding as they strike
consecutive wave crests. Operating on the surface in
rough conditions exposes the seaplane to forces that
can potentially cause damage or, in some cases,
overturn the seaplane. When a swell is not aligned
with the wind, the pilot must weigh the dangers
posed by the swell against limited crosswind
capability, as well as pilot experience.
On the other hand, calm, glassy water presents a different
set of challenges. Since the wind is calm, taxiing and
docking are somewhat easier, but takeoffs and landings
require special techniques. Takeoff distances may be
longer because the wings get no extra lifting help from
the wind. The floats seem to adhere more tenaciously to
the glassy water surface. When landing, the flat,
featureless surface makes it far more difficult to
gauge altitude accurately, and reflections can create
confusing optical illusions. The specific techniques
for glassy water operations are covered in Chapter
4, Seaplane Operations–Preflight and Takeoffs, and
Chapter 6, Seaplane Operations–Landing.
Tides are cause for concern when the airplane is
beached or moored in shallow water. A rising tide can
lift a beached seaplane and allow it to float out to sea if
the airplane is not properly secured. Depending on the
height of the tide and the topography of the beach, an
outgoing tide could leave a beached seaplane stranded
far from the water. [Figure 3-2]
While waves are simply an up and down undulation of
the water surface, currents are horizontal movements
of the water itself, such as the flow of water downstream in a river. Currents also exist in the oceans,
where solar heating, the Earth’s rotation, and tidal
forces cause the ocean water to circulate.
