CHUNK: 9
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0009
TITLE: BUOYS AND DAYBEACONS
PAGE_START: 2
PAGE_END: 3
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 2, 'page_end': 3, 'section_title': 'BUOYS AND DAYBEACONS', 'word_count': 404, 'block_count': 2, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 1, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8785, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 47.64, 'ocr_pages': '2'}

BUOYS AND DAYBEACONS
Buoys are floating markers held in place with cables or
chains to the bottom. Daybeacons are used for similar
purposes in shallower waters, and usually consist of a
marker placed on top of a piling or pole driven into the
bottom. Locations of buoys within U.S. waters are

1-3
The buoyage system used in the United States employs
a simple arrangement of colors, shapes, numbers, and
lights. Whenever operating near buoys, keep in mind
that the length of chain holding the buoy in place is
likely to be several times the depth of the water, so the
buoy may be some distance from its charted location,
as well as from any danger or obstruction it is intended
to mark. Do not come any closer to a buoy than
necessary.
Buoys with a cylindrical shape are called can buoys,
while those with a conical shape are known as nun
buoys. The shape often has significance in interpreting
the meaning of the buoy. [Figure 1-3]
Since a buoy’s primary purpose is to guide ships
through preferred channels to and from the open sea,
the colors, shapes, lights, and placement become
meaningful in that context. Approaching from seaward, the left (port) side of the channel is marked
with black or green can buoys. These buoys use odd
numbers whose values increase as the vessel moves
toward the coast. They also mark obstructions that
should be kept to the vessel’s left when proceeding
from seaward.
The right side of the channel, or obstructions that
should be kept to the vessel’s right when headed
toward shore, are marked with red nun buoys. These
shown on nautical charts prepared by the Office of
Coast Survey (OCS), an office within the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
Light lists prepared by the Coast Guard describe lightships, lighthouses, buoys, and daybeacons maintained
on all navigable waters of the United States.
Seaplane Base
No Facilities or Complete
Information is Not Available
Civil Seaplane Base
with Fuel and Services
Military Seaplane Base
with Fuel and Services
Figure 1-2. Seaplane landing areas have distinctive symbols
to distinguish them from land airports.
Keep to Right of Buoy or Piling
when Coming from Seaward
Keep to Left of Buoy or Piling
when Coming from Seaward
Keep to Right
to Follow
Primary Channel
Coming from
Seaward
Keep to Left
to Follow
Primary Channel
Coming from
Seaward
Mid-Channel Markers
Figure 1-3. Buoys typically used along waterways.
