CHUNK: 21
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0021
TITLE: Untitled section
PAGE_START: 7
PAGE_END: 8
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 7, 'page_end': 8, 'section_title': 'Untitled section', 'word_count': 857, 'block_count': 2, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 1, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8873, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 47.36, 'ocr_pages': '7'}

2-3
diverting the water and the air downward. The forward
bottom portion of a float or hull is designed very much
like the bottom of a speedboat. While speedboats are
intended to travel at a fairly constant pitch angle, seaplanes need to be able to rotate in pitch to vary the
wings’angle of attack and increase lift for takeoffs and
landings. The underside of a seaplane float has a sudden break in the longitudinal lines called the step. The
step provides a means of reducing water drag during
takeoff and during high-speed taxi.
At very low speeds, the entire length of the floats
supports the weight of the seaplane through buoyancy, that is, the floats displace a weight of water
equal to the weight of the seaplane. As speed
increases, aerodynamic lift begins to support a certain
amount of the weight, and the rest is supported by
hydrodynamic lift, the upward force produced by the
motion of the floats through the water. Speed increases
this hydrodynamic lift, but water drag increases more
quickly. To minimize water drag while allowing
hydrodynamic lift to do the work of supporting the
seaplane on the water, the pilot relaxes elevator back
pressure, allowing the seaplane to assume a pitch attitude that brings the aft portions of the floats out of the
water. The step makes this possible. When running on
the step, a relatively small portion of the float ahead of
the step supports the seaplane. Without a step, the flow
of water aft along the float would tend to remain
attached all the way to the rear of the float, creating
unnecessary drag.
The steps are located slightly behind the airplane’s
center of gravity (CG), approximately at the point
where the main wheels are located on a landplane
pounds. A seaplane equipped with two such floats
would seemingly be able to support an airplane
weighing 5,000 pounds, but the floats would both be
completely submerged at that weight. Obviously,
such a situation would be impractical, so seaplanes
are required to have a buoyancy of 80 percent in
excess of that required to support the maximum
weight of the seaplane in fresh water. To determine
the maximum weight allowed for a seaplane equipped
with two floats, divide the total displacement by 180
percent, or 1.8. Using the example of two floats that
each displace 2,500 pounds, the total displacement of
5,000 pounds divided by 1.8 gives a maximum weight
for the seaplane of 2,778 pounds. Many other considerations determine the suitability of a particular set of
floats for a specific type of airplane, and float
installations are carefully evaluated by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) prior to certification.
All floats are required to have at least four watertight
compartments. These prevent the entire float from filling with water if it is ruptured at any point. The floats
can support the seaplane with any two compartments
flooded, which makes the seaplane difficult to sink.
Most floats have openings with watertight covers along
the deck to provide access to the inside of each compartment for inspection and maintenance. There are
also smaller holes connected by tubes to the lowest
point in each compartment, called the bilge. These
bilge pump openings are used for pumping out the
bilge water that leaks into the float. The openings are
typically closed with small rubber balls that push
snugly into place.
Both the lateral and longitudinal lines of a float or hull
are designed to achieve a maximum lifting force by
Step
Skeg
Retractable
Water Rudder
Mooring
Cleat
Mooring Cleat
Bumper
Bumper
Internal Bulkheads Dividing
Watertight Compartments
Deck
Hand Hole Covers
Chine
Chine
Sister Keelson
Sister Keelson
Keel
Keel
Bilge Pump
Openings
Spray Rail
Bow
Stern
Figure 2-3. Float components.

2-4
with tricycle gear. If the steps were located too far aft
or forward of this point, it would be difficult, if not
impossible, to rotate the airplane into a nose-up attitude
prior to lifting off. Although steps are necessary, the
sharp break along the underside of the float or hull
concentrates structural stress into this area, and the
disruption in airflow produces considerable drag in
flight. The keel under the front portion of each float is
intended to bear the weight of the seaplane when it is
on dry land. The location of the step near the CG would
make it very easy to tip the seaplane back onto the rear
of the floats, which are not designed for such loads. The
skeg is located behind the step and acts as a sort of
chock when the seaplane is on land, making it more
difficult to tip the seaplane backward.
Most floatplanes are equipped with retractable water
rudders at the rear tip of each float. The water rudders
are connected by cables and springs to the rudder
pedals in the cockpit. While they are very useful in
maneuvering on the water surface, they are quite
susceptible to damage. The water rudders should be
retracted whenever the seaplane is in shallow water or
where they might hit objects under the water surface.
They are also retracted during takeoff and landing,
when dynamic water forces could cause damage.
