CHUNK: 1
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0001
TITLE: Untitled section
PAGE_START: 1
PAGE_END: 1
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 1, 'page_end': 1, 'section_title': 'Untitled section', 'word_count': 317, 'block_count': 2, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 1, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8841, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 95.02, 'ocr_pages': '1'}

1-1

PRIVILEGES AND LIMITATIONS
In general, the privileges and limitations of a seaplane
rating are similar to those of the equivalent land rating.
The same standards and requirements apply as for
comparable landplane certificates.
While it is possible for a student to use a seaplane to
obtain all the flight training necessary to earn a pilot
certificate, and many pilots have done so, this publication is intended primarily for pilots who already hold
airman certificates and would like to add seaplane
capabilities. Therefore, this chapter does not address
pilot certificate requirements, regulations, or procedures that would also apply to landplane operations.
Information on regulations not directly related to water
operations is available in other Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) publications.
For certification purposes, the term “seaplane” refers
to a class of aircraft. A pilot requires additional training when transitioning to a seaplane. Ground and flight
training must be received and logged, and a pilot must
pass a class rating practical test prior to initial operations as pilot in command. This training requires the
use of an authorized flight instructor to conduct such
training and attest to the competency of a pilot prior to
taking the practical test. Because the seaplane rating is
part of an existing pilot certificate, the practical test is
not as extensive as for a new pilot certificate, and covers only the procedures unique to seaplane operations.
No separate written test is required for pilots who are
adding seaplane to an existing pilot certificate.
Adding a seaplane rating does not modify the overall
limitations and privileges of the pilot certificate. For
example, private pilots with a seaplane rating are not
authorized to engage in seaplane operations that would
require a commercial certificate. Likewise, a pilot with
a single-engine seaplane class rating may not fly multiengine seaplanes without further training. However,
no regulatory distinction is made between flying boats
and seaplanes equipped with floats. [Figure 1-1]
