CHUNK: 33
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0033
TITLE: 19 - 24
PAGE_START: 10
PAGE_END: 11
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 10, 'page_end': 11, 'section_title': '19 - 24', 'word_count': 542, 'block_count': 2, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 2, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8845, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 95.37, 'ocr_pages': '10,11'}

19 - 24
25-31
32-38
Estimating Velocities
on Land
Smoke rises vertically.
Smoke drifts; wind
vanes unmoved.
Wind felt on face; leaves
rustle; ordinary
vane moves by wind.
Leaves and small twigs
in constant motion;
wind extends light flag.
Dust and loose paper
raised; small branches
are moved.
Small trees begin to
sway; crested wavelets
form in inland water.
Large branches in motion;
whistling heard in telegraph
wires; umbrellas used
with difficulty.
Whole trees in motion;
inconvenience felt in
walking against the wind.
Sea like a mirror.
Ripples with the appearance
of scales are formed but
without foam crests.
Small wavelets, still short
but more pronounced; crests
have a glassy appearance
and do not break.
Large wavelets; crests begin to
break. Foam of glassy appearance.
(Perhaps scattered whitecaps.)
Small waves, becoming longer;
fairly frequent whitecaps.
Moderate waves; taking a more
pronounced long form; many
whitecaps are formed.
(Chance of some spray.)
Large waves begin to form;
white foam crests are more
extensive everywhere.
(Probably some spray.)
Sea heaps up and white foam
from breaking waves begins
to be blown in streaks along
the direction of the wind.
Estimating Velocities
on Sea
Check your glassy water
technique before water flying
under these conditions.
Ideal water flying
characteristics in
protected water.
This is considered rough
water for seaplanes and
small amphibians,
especially in open water.
This type of water condition
is for emergency only in small
aircraft in inland waters and
for the expert pilot.
Figure 3-1.The size of waves is determined by the speed of the wind.

3-3
can subject the floats to hard pounding as they strike
consecutive wave crests. Operating on the surface in
rough conditions exposes the seaplane to forces that
can potentially cause damage or, in some cases,
overturn the seaplane. When a swell is not aligned
with the wind, the pilot must weigh the dangers
posed by the swell against limited crosswind
capability, as well as pilot experience.
On the other hand, calm, glassy water presents a different
set of challenges. Since the wind is calm, taxiing and
docking are somewhat easier, but takeoffs and landings
require special techniques. Takeoff distances may be
longer because the wings get no extra lifting help from
the wind. The floats seem to adhere more tenaciously to
the glassy water surface. When landing, the flat,
featureless surface makes it far more difficult to
gauge altitude accurately, and reflections can create
confusing optical illusions. The specific techniques
for glassy water operations are covered in Chapter
4, Seaplane Operations–Preflight and Takeoffs, and
Chapter 6, Seaplane Operations–Landing.
Tides are cause for concern when the airplane is
beached or moored in shallow water. A rising tide can
lift a beached seaplane and allow it to float out to sea if
the airplane is not properly secured. Depending on the
height of the tide and the topography of the beach, an
outgoing tide could leave a beached seaplane stranded
far from the water. [Figure 3-2]
While waves are simply an up and down undulation of
the water surface, currents are horizontal movements
of the water itself, such as the flow of water downstream in a river. Currents also exist in the oceans,
where solar heating, the Earth’s rotation, and tidal
forces cause the ocean water to circulate.
