CHUNK: 55
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0055
TITLE: DETERMINING SEA CONDITIONS
PAGE_START: 9
PAGE_END: 10
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 9, 'page_end': 10, 'section_title': 'DETERMINING SEA CONDITIONS', 'word_count': 894, 'block_count': 2, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 2, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8822, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 95.48, 'ocr_pages': '9,10'}

DETERMINING SEA CONDITIONS
The ability to read the water’s surface is an integral
part of seaplane flying. The interaction of wind and
water determine the surface conditions, while tides and
currents affect the movement of the water itself.
Features along the shore and under the water’s surface
contribute their effects as well. With a little study, the
interplay between these factors becomes clearer.
A few simple terms describe the anatomy and characteristics of waves. The top of a wave is the crest, and
the low valley between waves is a trough. The height
of waves is measured from the bottom of the trough to
the top of the crest. Naturally, the distance between two
wave crests is the wavelength. The time interval
between the passage of two successive wave crests at a
fixed point is the period of the wave.
Waves are usually caused by wind moving across
the surface of the water. As the air pushes the water,
ripples form. These ripples become waves in strong or
sustained winds; the higher the speed of the wind, or
the longer the wind acts on them, the larger the waves.
Waves can be caused by other factors, such as underwater earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, or tidal
movement, but wind is the primary cause of most
waves. [Figure 3-1 on next page]
Calm water begins to show wave motion when the
wind reaches about two knots. At this windspeed,
patches of ripples begin to form. If the wind stops, surface tension and gravity quickly damp the waves, and
the surface returns to its flat, glassy condition. If the
wind increases to four knots, the ripples become small
waves, which move in the same direction as the wind
and persist for some time after the wind stops blowing.
As windspeed increases above four knots, the water
surface becomes covered with a complicated pattern of
waves. When the wind is increasing, waves become
larger and travel faster. If the wind remains at a constant speed, waves develop into a series of evenly
spaced parallel crests of the same height.
In simple waves, an object floating on the surface
shows that waves are primarily an up and down motion
of the water, rather than the water itself moving downwind at the speed of the waves. The floating object
describes a circle in the vertical plane, moving upward
as the crest approaches, forward and downward as the
crest passes, and backward as the trough passes. After
each wave passes, the object is at almost the same place
as before. The wind does cause floating objects to drift
slowly downwind.
While the wind is blowing and adding energy to the
water, the resulting waves are commonly referred to
as wind waves or sea. (Sea is also occasionally used
3-1
pe

3-2
to describe the combined motion of all the factors
disturbing the surface.) These waves tend to be a
chaotic mix of heights, periods, and wavelengths.
Because the wind causes the height to increase faster
than the wavelength, they often have relatively
steep, pointed crests and rounded troughs. With a
windspeed of 12 knots, the waves begin to break at
their crests and create foam.
The height of waves depends on three factors: windspeed, length of time the wind blows over the water,
and the distance over which the wind acts on the water.
As waves move away from the area where they were
generated (called a fetch), they begin to sort themselves by height and period, becoming regular and
evenly spaced. These waves often continue for thousands of miles from where they were generated. Swell
is the term describing waves that persist outside the
fetch or in the absence of the force that generated them.
A swell may be large or small, and does not indicate the
direction of the wind. The wake of a boat or ship is also
a swell.
Unlike wind and current, waves are not deflected much
by the rotation of the Earth, but move in the direction
in which the generating wind blows. When this wind
ceases, water friction and spreading reduce the wave
height, but the reduction takes place so slowly that a
swell persists until the waves encounter an obstruction,
such as a shore. Swell systems from many different
directions, even from different parts of the world, may
cross each other and interact. Often two or more swell
systems are visible on the surface, with a sea wave system developing due to the current wind.
In lakes and sheltered waters, it is often easy to tell
wind direction by simply looking at the water’s surface. There is usually a strip of calm water along the
upwind shore of a lake. Waves are perpendicular to the
wind direction. Windspeeds above approximately eight
knots leave wind streaks on the water, which are parallel to the wind.
Land masses sculpt and channel the air as it moves over
them, changing the wind direction and speed. Wind
direction may change dramatically from one part of a
lake or bay to another, and may even blow in opposite
directions within a surprisingly short distance. Always
pay attention to the various wind indicators in the area,
especially when setting up for takeoff or landing.
Terms Used
by U.S.
Weather Service
Calm
Light Air
Light
Breeze
Gentle
Breeze
Moderate
Breeze
Fresh
Breeze
Strong
Breeze
Moderate
Gale
Velocity
m.p.h.
Less than 1
