CHUNK: 61
CHUNK_ID: test-2:chunk-0061
TITLE: 4 Small wavelets, still short
PAGE_START: 10
PAGE_END: 10
METADATA: {'source': 'test-2', 'page_start': 10, 'page_end': 10, 'section_title': '4 Small wavelets, still short', 'word_count': 626, 'block_count': 1, 'contains_ocr': True, 'ocr_page_count': 1, 'ocr_quality_mean': 0.8788, 'ocr_confidence_mean': 95.33, 'ocr_pages': '10'}

4 Small wavelets, still short
but more pronounced; crests
have a glassy appearance
and do not break.
8Leaves and small twigs
in constant motion;
wind extends light flag.
Large wavelets; crests begin to
break. Foam of glassy appearance.
(Perhaps scattered whitecaps.)
Ideal water flying
characteristics in
protected water.
Light
Breeze
Gentle
Breeze
Moderate
Breeze
Dust and loose paper
raised; small branches
are moved.
Small waves, becoming longer;
fairly frequent whitecaps.
13-18
Fresh 19 - 24
Breeze
Strong 25-31 Large branches in motion;
Breeze whistling heard in telegraph
wires; umbrellas used
with difficulty.
-3
-7
12
Small trees begin to
sway; crested wavelets
form in inland water.
Moderate waves; taking a more
pronounced long form; many
whitecaps are formed.
(Chance of some spray.)
This is considered rough
water for seaplanes and
small amphibians,
especially in open water.
Large waves begin to form;
white foam crests are more
extensive everywhere.
(Probably some spray.)
inconvenience felt in
walking against the wind.
Moderate 32-38 Whole trees in motion;
Gale
Sea heaps up and white foam
from breaking waves begins
to be blown in streaks along
the direction of the wind.
This type of water condition
is for emergency only in small
aircraft in inland waters and
for the expert pilot.
Figure 3-1. The size of waves is determined by the speed of the wind.
to describe the combined motion of all the factors
disturbing the surface.) These waves tend to be a
chaotic mix of heights, periods, and wavelengths.
Because the wind causes the height to increase faster
than the wavelength, they often have relatively
steep, pointed crests and rounded troughs. With a
windspeed of 12 knots, the waves begin to break at
their crests and create foam.
The height of waves depends on three factors: windspeed, length of time the wind blows over the water,
and the distance over which the wind acts on the water.
As waves move away from the area where they were
generated (called a fetch), they begin to sort themselves by height and period, becoming regular and
evenly spaced. These waves often continue for thousands of miles from where they were generated. Swell
is the term describing waves that persist outside the
fetch or in the absence of the force that generated them.
Aswell may be large or small, and does not indicate the
direction of the wind. The wake of a boat or ship is also
a swell.
Unlike wind and current, waves are not deflected much
by the rotation of the Earth, but move in the direction
3-2
in which the generating wind blows. When this wind
ceases, water friction and spreading reduce the wave
height, but the reduction takes place so slowly that a
swell persists until the waves encounter an obstruction,
such as a shore. Swell systems from many different
directions, even from different parts of the world, may
cross each other and interact. Often two or more swell
systems are visible on the surface, with a sea wave system developing due to the current wind.
In lakes and sheltered waters, it is often easy to tell
wind direction by simply looking at the water’s surface. There is usually a strip of calm water along the
upwind shore of a lake. Waves are perpendicular to the
wind direction. Windspeeds above approximately eight
knots leave wind streaks on the water, which are parallel to the wind.
Land masses sculpt and channel the air as it moves over
them, changing the wind direction and speed. Wind
direction may change dramatically from one part of a
lake or bay to another, and may even blow in opposite
directions within a surprisingly short distance. Always
pay attention to the various wind indicators in the area,
especially when setting up for takeoff or landing.
pe
